Chronological Change List

This file is the accumulated list of changes in the course of development of
hsqldb 1.8.0 in reverse chronological order.

Fred Toussi (fredt@users.sourceforge.net)
Maintainer, HSQLDB Project

2005.02.02 1.8.0.RC9

Fixed unreported bug in recovery when first column contains null.
Fixed unreported issue with possible PK and FK name duplication
Fixed reported bug in recovery when there is no primary key.
Fixed reported issue with deleting self referencing row (with foreign key).
Fixed reported issue with illegal user names
Fixed jdk 1.3 compilation issues
Applied submitted patch to Server

Applied submitted patch for setting the default table type when CREATE TABLE is
used. The connection property, hsqldb.default_table_type=cached will set the
default to CACHED tables, or the SET PROPERTY command can be used. Values,
"cached" and "memory" are allowed.
 
The database property sql.enforce_strict_size=true has now a wider effect
Previously CHAR /VARCHAR lengths could be checked and padding performed only 
when inserting / updating rows. Added support for CHAR(n), VARCHAR(n), 
NUMERIC(p,s) and DECIMAL(p,s) including SQL standard cast and convert semantics.  
Explicit CAST(c AS VARCHAR(2)) will always truncate the string. Explicit 
CAST(n AS NUMERIC(p,s)) will always perform the conversion or throw if n is out
of bounds. All other implicit and explicit conversions to CHAR(n) and VARCHAR(n) 
are subject to SQL standard rules.
 
Bob has improved support for text tables. Newline support in quoted fields is
now complete. It is now possible to save and restore the first line header of a
CSV file when ignore_first=true is specified. When a text table is created with 
a new source (CSV) file, and ignore_first=true has been specified the following
command can be used to set a user defined string as the first line:
SET TABLE <tablename> SOURCE HEADER <double quoted string>.

When embedded in OOo, several defaults and properties are set automatically:

CREATE TABLE ... defaults to CREATE CACHED TABLE ...
hsqldb.cache_scale=13
hsqldb.cache_size_scale=8
hsqldb.log_size=10
SET WRITE DELAY 2
sql.enforce_strict_size=true
hsqldb.first_identity=1


2005.02.11 1.8.0.RC8

Fixed minor bugs

Added public shutdown() method to Server.

A new application log has been introduced as an optional feature. The
property/value pair "hsqldb.applog=1" can be used in the first connection string 
to log some important messages. The default is "hsqldb.applog=0", meaning no
logging. A file with the ending ".app.log" is generated alongside the rest of
the database files for this purpose. 

In the current version only the classes used for file persistence (different in
OpenOffice.org), plus any error encountered while processing the .log file after
an abnormal end is logged.

Bob Preston has updated the text table support to accept new line characters
inside quoted strings. It is still not possible to create / modify a row 
containing a new line inside the engine. This will be a simple upgrade and will
be included in the next RC.

Note that the JDBC driver and the engine for 1.8.0 cannot be mixed with those of
earlier versions in client/server setup. Check your classpaths and use the same
version of the engine for both client and server.


2005.01.28 1.8.0.RC7

Fixed minor bugs

2005.01.24 1.8.0.RC5

Issues with SET CHECKPOINT DEFRAG fixed

New property for larger data file limits is introduced. Once set, the limit will
go up to 8GB. The property can be set with the following SQL command only when 
the database has no tables (new database).

SET PROPERTY "hsqldb.cache_file_scale" 8

To apply the change to an existing database, SHUTDOWN SCRIPT should be performed 
first, then the property=value line below should be added to the .properties
file before reopening the database:

hsqldb.cache_file_scale=8

It is now possible to add or drop a primary key.

An existing primary key that is to be removed should not be referenced in a
FOREIGN KEY constraint. If a table has an IDENTITY column, removing a primary 
key will remove the identity attribute of the column but leave the actual data.

When adding a primary key, a NOT NULL constraint is automatically added to the 
column definitions. The table data for the columns of a newly declared primary
key should not contain null values. 

ALTER TABLE <name> ADD CONSTRAINT <cname> PRIMARY KEY(collist);
ALTER TABLE <name> DROP CONSTRAINT <cname>;
ALTER TABLE <name> DROP PRIMARY KEY; // alternative syntax

2005.01.20 1.8.0.RC4

More minor bug fixes
ResultSetMetaData reports identical precision/scale in embedded and 
client/server modes

2005.01.16 1.8.0.RC3

Regression bug fixes.
New property allows a CHECKPOINT DEFRAG to be performed automatically whenever
CHECKPOINT is performed internally or via a user command.

SET CHECKPOINT DEFRAG n

The parameter n is the megabytes of abandoned space in the .data file. When
a CHECKPOINT is performed either as a result of the .log file reaching the 
limit set by "SET LOGSIZE m", or by the user issuing a CHECKPOINT command, the
amount of space abandoned during the session is checked and if it is larger 
than n, a CHECKPOINT DEFRAG is performed instead of a checkpoint.

2005.01.14 1.8.0.RC2

Regression bug fixes.


2005.01.10 1.8.0.RC1

Allows embedding into OpenOffice.org
Rewrite of log and cache handling classes, including:
New deleted block manager with more effective deleted block reuse.
Faster log processing after an abnormal termination.
Better checks when maximum data file size is reached.
Better recovery when maximum data file size is reached.

Changes to row access to use iterators. More code clarity.

Various refactorings and new package for improved modularity. 

Enhancements to DatabaseManagerSwing

In all other respects, 1.8.0.RC1 is identical to 1.7.3.1